Welcome back.
In this lesson we are going to do a deeper dive into the use effects.
Now we don't actually need to use some of the functionality that we're about to talk about but it's
good for us to at the very least cover it so that we're aware now when we think about our use effective
with use effect we actually can pass back a function from the function that we pass it.
So what do I mean by this.
Well let's say we were using our use effective.
We did something and we are able to return a function from this function this function that we return
is what's called a cleanup function and a cleanup function is what use effect calls when that component
on mounts.
So it's our way of replicating the lifecycle method component will on.
Now why would we want something like this.
Well before we implemented our sagas if you remember the way that we were using and subscribing to our
fire store was we were using their subscription methods in order to provide listeners and get snapshots.
So if you remember what we were doing we were pretty much bringing in the firestarter library into our
component and pretend is the class component.
What we had to do is we had to say unsubscribe from collections was equal to no right.
Because we were setting some class method that we were storing the value of inside of our component.
Did mount lifecycle method and we were saying this dot unsubscribe from collections was equal to fire
store dog collection collections not on snapshot and then we would pass it the callback where we would
get the snapshot and we would do something with it.
After that we had to actually unsubscribe right inside of component will on Mount
and this was our way of cleaning up from our listener right.
This was the pattern we had to do using this observer pattern of listening to on snapshot.
Well if we wanted to replicate this inside of a classless component using use effect that's the whole
point of this return function.
So I'll show you how we'll do it.
So what we would do is let's say right here in our use effect we say I am subscribing just so that we
can log it and see what happens we call fire story collection using our collections and then we say
on snapshot we take the snapshot and we simply console log it that's all we do.
In fact you really need the async because we're just console logging in this function.
Now what we do is we set some cost unsubscribe
can't spell today on sub scribe from collections is equal to this object.
Because we still need to store the unsubscribe function we get back from on snapshot what we would do
however is inside of our cleanup function.
We could call the unsubscribe right here.
In fact we'll also console log I am unsubscribed
and now we only want to initialize this subscription on our mounting right after we've mounted so we
of course pass the empty array to indicate that we only want to use this effect when it mounts but we
also want to call this return function when our component mounts.
So this will call regardless of whether or not we pass this function in if we pass it a clean up function
use effect we'll call the cleanup function when the component amounts.
So now if we go to a collection page right here we'll see we get our I am subscribing we subscribe to
our collection and we get a snapshot.
And if that collection ever changes while we're still listening to it and let's a new object comes in
right or an object changes right we'll get a new snapshot and then we'll do our console log we'll fire
again.
So this is the subscription model.
But let's say we on Mount this collection page component by going to the home page while we see that
our cleanup function got fired.
So I am unsubscribe and gets fired and are unsubscribe will also get called so that's the whole purpose
of a cleanup function.
The cleanup function is meant to mimic any component well on Mounts right.
Which allows you to clean up your effect so that's pretty much the main thing about what you want to
return from use effect.
This is also why when we use that async function we passed it in the use effect gave us that warning
that said we were not allowed to pass it anything other than a function that will represent a cleanup
function.
So that's pretty much why it's because the only thing that use effect expects a function to return to
use effect is a function that it will call when the component mounts in the future whenever you need
to possibly leverage the use effect hook inside of a component and you need to use component will on
Mount one now you know how to do it using this cleanup function now we can remove this use effect from
our component because we don't actually need it.
Given how our application was built we added that code solely to explain the cleanup function but now
our component is still leveraging hooks in those previous two lessons that we did where we converted
using use effect and you state to replace our components and make them functional components.
So now let's just make sure to commit Arco.
So we'll see what we did.
We know that we updated our application RF component sign in component and sign up component to use
hooks we'll push that up
and move on with our lessons.